What is maven the developers call it a
build automation tool but it is much
more than that it is a project
management tool. Building a project means
compiling the source code running the
tests which could be unit tests as well
as integration tests packaging the
compiled code into jar files bundling
these jar files into a web archive or a
war file deploying these wars on to the
servers and several other tasks all
these tasks can be automated using tools
such as maven and etc if you have worked
with tools like ant apache ant then you
know that we have to come up with a lot
of XML configuration to perform these
tasks or to automate these tasks for our
application whereas maven uses
convention over configuration that is if
we follow a certain project structure
when we create our projects such as here
is the base project directory under it
source main Java source folder has a
child folder called main under it we
have Java this is where all our source
code should go source main SRC main
resources is where any resources such as
property files or XML configuration that
we use in our Java classes should go
SRC test Java is where all our unit
and integration tests should be placed
and finally SRC test resources is
where all the property files or XML
configuration that we use on our tests
should be placed once we use this folder
structure we can simply execute a maven
command such as maven install and maven
will compile the source code under the
SRC main Java run the unit tests under
SRC test Java and if the tests pass it
will bundle or package the compiled
classes into a jar file if it is a
standalone java application if it is a
web application it will bundle it into a
war file and it can also deploy
the war file onto a web application.
This folder structure will be slightly
different for a standalone Java project
for a web application and for different
types of projects but the beauty is that
we need not create these folders
manually for each type of project maven
provides several archetypes think about
these archetypes as templates we can
execute a command with an archetype and
it will create the folder structure the
standard folder structure required by
maven for us there are different types
of archetypes like standalone, webapp, EAR
etc another additional advantage is that
all the popular ides such as Eclipse
IntelliJ come with inbuilt support for
these archetypes we can create the
project's the different types of maven
projects from within an IDE and also
run and execute our build from within
eclipse from within intelliJ.